# Abalone-Data-Analysis-in-R

Introduction: According to Wikipedia, Abalone is a common name for any of a group of small to very large sea snails, marine gastropod molluscs in the family Haliotidae. The dataset is based (with modifications) on Warwick J. Nash, Tracy L. Sellers, Simon R. Talbot, Andrew J. Cawthorn and Wes B. Ford (1994) “The Population Biology of Abalone (Haliotis species) in Tasmania. I. Blacklip Abalone (H. rubra) from the North Coast and Islands of Bass Strait”, Sea Fisheries Division, Technical Report No. 48 (ISSN 1034-3288). Retrieved from the UCI. Machine Learning Repository (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/abalone). 
First part is about sustainability to predict sex from physical measurements. Here “Infant” being considered its own sex. In exploratory analysis of the given dataset I noticed that there exist wrong measurements of height data and few large values which can be classified as outliers. Overall, 7 samples data out of total 4177 samples are removed as part of data cleaning. Removed samples had height 0,2,3,103 and 226. Also, square root of transformation done for Shucked and Viscera weight. This will help to make linear prediction of these measurements from physical measurements. This transformation is done for part 2 analysis. 

Sustainability Analysis: 
Three classification methods are evaluated in this part. All models provide similar misclassification rate (47%~45%) with SVM being slightly lower than Multinomial and QDA. All the models provide similar precision and recall performance in identifying “Infants”. Infants can be identified with precision (63%~65%) and recall rate is (71%~75%). SVM model can be considered slightly better than other two models. None of the models are good in predicting male or female from physical measurements. Either precision or recall is below 50%. So, it can be concluded that there is no true evidence to distinguish male and female from physical measurements. And further parameters can be checked to verify if such prediction is possible or not. 

Profitability Analysis:
 Shucked and Viscera weight can be estimated from physical measurements. Square root of shucked and viscera weight used in the linear prediction as with that R-squared increased by approximate 10%. And the model can explain 92% of the variation. It is worth note that the sample data does not satisfy multivariate normality criteria to get joint density distribution conditioning on input of length, diameter, and height measurement. However, it for simplicity reason they are considered as normal distribution and their parameters reflects true population parameters. Mean of the joint density requires input parameters to get the mean of shucked and viscera weight. Whereas covariance matrix of the conditional density is calculated based on the sample covariance matrix. 90% prediction interval of true cost value is calculated using the simultaneous prediction interval of the shucked and viscera weight from given physical measurements of abalone. Cost interval is calculated based on the lower and higher ranges of the weights. This is implemented through function where it will take physical measurements and unit prices as input and provide the output in list format. 

Conclusion 
Here only physical parameters are used to predict sex of the abalone and found that it is feasible to predict Infant using classification models. And models are not good in predicting male and female from length, diameter, and height measurements. Also, prediction of shucked and viscera weight is feasible from physical measurements. The linear model can explain approximate 92% of the variation. Using the model, it is feasible to predict the price using unit price of the shucked and viscera. Also, function is created to get 90% price interval rage using prediction interval of the mean weights. It is worth to study other parameters of the dataset to find out whether further improvements can be done on these models.
